[Music]
hi everyone welcome to the podcast my
name is dr mark eatonson i'm a licensed
psychologist specializing in the
treatment of pathological narcissism and
related issues
today i'd like to talk about
interpersonal sensitivity and the legacy
of relational trauma in narcissism
narcissistic individuals tend to be
hypersensitive to feeling criticized
rejected humiliated or ashamed this
tendency can be especially problematic
in both personal and professional
relationships because narcissistic
individuals tend to perceive criticism
where none was actually intended it
would be easy to simply pass this
tendency off as being about vanity and
entitlement essentially it would be easy
to say that well narcissists are so full
of themselves that they become angry
when others don't explicitly fall in
line and support their grandiose
self-image and for some individuals to a
certain extent that may be true but as
with so many aspects of this disorder
that explanation leaves out the heart of
the issue sensitivity to social
rejection in narcissism is really about
relational trauma in essence
narcissistic individuals become
triggered by the perception that they're
being criticized or by the feeling of
being humiliated rejected or shamed
so today i'd like to discuss what that
actually means in hopes that we can
further humanize this much maligned
disorder and at the same time i hope to
emphasize the issue of personal
responsibility
we can't help how we were raised and we
aren't ultimately responsible for the
feelings that arise in our conscious
experience but we are responsible for
our behaviors healing from npd involves
both viewing the self through a
compassionate lens and taking
responsibility for how we treat
ourselves and other people to begin i'd
like to acknowledge that nobody likes
social rejection it's normal to feel
defensive or angry when we're criticized
betrayed or humiliated these are
experiences that we all try to avoid
because they threaten our self-esteem
from an evolutionary psychology
perspective anger exists to motivate us
to protect something we value whether
it's a mama bear protecting her cubs or
a dog barking at somebody in the front
yard or two children screaming at each
other because they both want to play
with the same toy anger is about
protecting what is precious loved ones
property or even something as abstract
as self-image
we all have a preferred way of seeing
ourselves we want to feel like the
things we do are good and that they're
valued by other people and likewise we
also want to feel that we ourselves are
good and valued by other people when
we're denied that feeling we experience
things like disappointment shame
humiliation or anger for individuals
with stable self-esteem and a flexible
self-image social rejection can be
difficult to weather but for those with
unstable self-esteem or an inflexible
self-image it can be nearly impossible
narcissists become so reactive and angry
when they feel rejected because to them
self-esteem is a precious commodity and
the roots of this issue lie in
relational trauma i went to a weekend
training in mentalization-based
psychotherapy a few years ago it's a
popular approach for working with
borderline personality disorder and also
npd and the presenters made a point of
repeating that feeling misunderstood or
mischaracterized is a type of relational
trauma when we're young and first
putting together the pieces of a self
feeling misunderstood can be devastating
i invite you to think back to your own
childhood and i'll bet there's an
upsetting memory of someone
misunderstanding or mischaracterizing
you
maybe you were accused of lying when you
really hadn't maybe you got in trouble
for something that someone else had done
something happened that was unfair these
events however minor they may seem stick
with us because feeling understood is a
vital building block of self-image and
self-esteem personally i can remember
being in kindergarten i was at my after
school daycare someone fell off the
swing and the teacher punished me
because she thought that i had pushed
them i tried to tell her that i was
innocent
but she didn't believe me she even went
as far as to say that she had seen me do
it
now i knew that she was lying or at
least mistaken but i was powerless to
reestablish my good name if i try hard
enough i can still feel a surge of anger
inside of myself toward this probably
underpaid and overworked teacher who had
the unfortunate responsibility of
watching dozens of kindergartners her
aim that day wasn't to perpetrate an
injustice that would be remembered for
decades
but that's exactly what happened
it sounds ridiculous and in some ways it
is but not if we view it from the
perspective of a child with an immature
self-image i'm making such a big deal
out of this because in pathological
narcissism the self has been wounded
in many ways it remains not fully
developed
evidence is showing that relational
trauma can have a serious and lasting
impact on psychological development
and relational trauma can be something
sudden and horrifying like the
unexpected loss of a family member but i
think more often it's subtle and chronic
like persistent verbal or emotional
abuse or neglect
psychologists have long suspected that
pathological narcissism is the result of
a constellation of early relational
trauma
self-psychology which is the field of
psychology that studies pathological
narcissism points to caregivers who fail
to provide consistent attuned empathic
mirroring essentially the child grows up
feeling invisible to parents or even
worse feeling misunderstood and
mischaracterized this results in deep
wounds that sets the developing child at
odds with their own emotional and social
needs imagine if you were a young child
and you ran to show mom or dad your
latest work of art but instead of
celebrating your achievement they got
angry with you for bothering them or for
using too much paper and now imagine
that this sort of reaction was more the
rule than the exception over time you
might begin to feel hypersensitive to
sudden social rejection especially when
what you were really looking for was
approval you might become increasingly
shy about asking for said approval maybe
you begin to defend against your own
needs for approval by adopting an
attitude of superiority after all
perfect people don't need approval you
begin to bury your authentic needs for
love and acceptance under a defensive
facade otto kurnberg a famous author on
the topic of npd and the principal
developer of transference focused
psychotherapy notes that narcissistic
patients often describe
cold rejecting or covertly aggressive
treatment by their parents
in other words lack of attuned empathic
mirroring combined with feeling
overvalued or even exploited by parents
for one or more favored qualities
for example
a parent might brag to other people
about how smart or well-behaved a child
is while essentially ignoring that
child's authentic emotional needs on a
regular basis basically it's the
combination of a lack of warmth and
understanding combined with pressure to
do or be something that the child is not
that seems to produce a narcissistic
defensive
adaptation the child's developing
self-image becomes a quagmire of
conflicting representations comfort
seeking is paired with rejection and
humiliation being deserving of love
becomes attached to unrealistic ideals
essentially the necessity of being shiny
or flawless or a prize in order to earn
love the person becomes alienated from
their authentic self
and this is why narcissists tend to be
so sensitive to feeling criticized
these experiences trigger relational
trauma and the narcissistic person
lashes back with an angry attack
designed to deflect those triggering
feelings the narcissist is mounting a
defense of their self-image and it
doesn't matter whether the attack is
real or imagined
they are re-experiencing a devastating
trauma
their mind has been catapulted back to
another time and another setting
a time when they were small and
defenseless and this is an important
point to understand about trauma when
trauma is re-experienced it isn't
like the trauma is happening again
from a psychological perspective the
trauma is happening again
there's no subjective difference no
distinction between then and now here or
there
trauma is like a photograph on the wall
it doesn't change it doesn't grow or
admit new information when a
narcissistic individual with a history
of relational trauma is triggered by
social rejection they aren't feeling
quote as if the original trauma is
happening to them again in a very real
psychological way the original trauma is
happening to them again
and that's why the reactions can be so
severe and seemingly so detached from
what's actually going on the person is
back inside a room in their mind where
horrible things are happening
unspeakable betrayals of their most
basic needs for love acceptance and
safety unimaginable cruel or callous
treatment of their childhood self and i
don't say this to excuse behavior that
might be abusive but it is important to
understand that when a person is
re-experiencing trauma they aren't
accurately perceiving the situation and
of course there's a wide gray area
between slight hypersensitivity to
social rejection and full-on
re-experiencing of relational trauma
most people fall somewhere in between
relational trauma is also somewhat
tricky because the issues may have been
encoded at a time before the person
could even speak or before their self
had a chance to consolidate into a
coherent identity there may be cracks in
the foundation that can't be directly
seen but they can be detected by the
stress that's placed on other parts of
the structure
whenever we talk about childhood wounds
or
relational trauma or abuse or neglect
it tends to bring up angry feelings and
i think that's normal and it's okay
but i also want to stress the futility
of placing blame for this sort of
relational trauma
even well-meaning parents and caregivers
have massive blind spots
i haven't met a parent who didn't screw
their child up somehow
in a way it's inevitable
we're all human and we hurt those we
love
often without intending to
and even if that weren't the case even
if you had the worst parents in the
world
playing the blame game won't get you any
closer to a happy life whatever happened
happened
it's done
it's over
the task now
is to focus on the present
so what can you do in the here and now
if you notice this tendency in yourself
or someone you love
first
compassion remember that this behavior
happens because of an injury when we
sustain a physical injury we expect that
the area will be sensitive the same is
true for narcissistic injuries if you've
noticed or maybe received feedback that
you seem really sensitive to criticism
or that you often perceive others as
attacking or rejecting you when they
aren't really doing that then it may
help to remind yourself that you are
injured in a very particular way
where others might not perceive any
criticism at all
maybe you perceive a devastating blow to
your self-esteem work on giving more
space to both yourself and to other
people give yourself space to feel hurt
wounded or triggered excuse yourself to
go feel your feelings
you can say something like
i'm having a very strong reaction to
what you just said and i need some time
to make sense of my feelings but also
give others the benefit of the doubt
practice not immediately assuming that
they're trying to hurt you just because
you feel hurt instead
practice making the conscious choice to
assume that they have no idea that
you're vulnerable in this particular way
if you had a bruise on your back you
wouldn't hold it against someone for
patting you on the back and accidentally
hurting your bruise you might wince and
you might exclaim ouch
but you would understand that they
didn't know that you were injured try to
have that same mentality when it comes
to this emotional injury second
take responsibility others are not
responsible for your sensitivity you are
if you try to hold your family friends
or loved ones accountable for tiptoeing
around you all you'll succeed in doing
is driving them away this injury is
yours to bear and it's yours to heal
don't expect other people to alter their
behavior because you're sensitive you do
the work to make it better not them take
ownership of your pain understand that
it doesn't make you a bad person but it
also doesn't make you entitled to
special treatment this is where therapy
can be especially helpful a therapist
who's familiar with narcissistic issues
will be able to help you develop greater
self-compassion and greater
responsibility it isn't your fault that
you feel the way that you do but it also
isn't anyone else's fault either this
can be a particularly difficult pill to
swallow we naturally want revenge for
the ways that we were injured or hurt or
mistreated but chasing revenge fantasies
only drives us further and further into
pain when it comes to narcissism the
keys are acceptance compassion and
understanding as always this information
is presented for educational purposes
and it's not meant to address any
specific person or issue only a licensed
mental health professional who has
talked to you personally can provide
that sort of information
until next time take care
[Music]
you